CONTENTS
1. Installing EMBASSY HMMER
2. Installing original HMMER
3. Setting up HMMER
4. Documentation
5. EMBASSY HMMER notes
6. Rough guide to writing an EMBASSY wrapper to HMMER.



1. Installing EMBASSY HMMER
The EMBASSY HMMER package contains "wrapper" applications providing an 
EMBOSS-style interface to the applications in the original HMMER package 
version 2.3.2 developed by Sean Eddy.

Please read the file INSTALL in the EMBASSY HMMER package distribution 
for installation instructions.



2. Installing original HMMER
To use EMBASSY HMMER, you will first need to download and install the 
original HMMER package:
WWW home:       http://hmmer.wustl.edu/
Distribution:   ftp://ftp.genetics.wustl.edu/pub/eddy/hmmer/

Please read the file 00README in the the original HMMER package 
distribution for installation instructions.



3. Setting up HMMER
For the EMBASSY HMMER package to work, the directory containing the 
original HMMER executables *must* be in your path. For example if you
executables were installed to "/usr/local/hmmer/bin", then type:

set path=(/usr/local/hmmer/bin/ $path)
rehash



4. Documentation
Please read the Userguide.pdf distributed with the original HMMER 
and included in the EMBASSY HMMER distribution under the DOCS directory.
The first 3 chapters (Introduction, Installation and Tutorial) are 
particularly useful.

Please read the notes below for a description of the differences between the
original and EMBASSY HMMER, particularly which application command line 
options are supported. 

Read documentation on-line: http://emboss.sourceforge.net/apps/



5. EMBASSY HMMER notes
EMBASSY HMMER is a suite of application wrappers to the original hmmer v2.3.2 
applications. hmmer v2.3.2 must be installed on the same system as EMBOSS and 
the location of the hmmer executables must be defined in your path for EMBASSY
HMMER to work.

Where possible, the same command-line qualifier names and parameter order is 
used as in the original hmmer.  There are however several unavoidable 
differences and these are clearly documented in the application documentation.  

More or less all options documented as "expert" in the original hmmer user 
guide are given in ACD as "advanced" options (-options must be specified on 
the command-line in order to be prompted for a value for them).  

The original hmmer uses BLAST environment variables (below), if defined, to 
locate files. The EMBASSY HMMER does not.
BLASTDB   location of sequence databases to be searched
BLASMAT   location of substitution matrices
HMMERDB   location of HMMs

EMBASSY HMMER does not include the "ealistat" application that was included 
in the previous (v2.1.1) port. 

Input and output of alignments and sequences is limited to the formats that 
the original hmmer supports. These include stockholm, SELEX, MSF, Clustal, 
Phylip and A2M /aligned FASTA (alignments) and FASTA, GENBANK, EMBL, GCG, 
PIR (sequences).  It would be fairly straightforward to adapt the code to 
support all EMBOSS-supported formats. 

Automatic processing of gzipped files is not supported. 

hmmer v3.2.1 and therefore EMBASSY HMMER is only recommended for use with 
protein sequences.  If you provide a non-protein sequence you will be 
reprompted for a protein sequence.  To accept nucleic acid sequences you must 
replace instances of < type: "protein" > in the application ACD files with 
<type: "nucleic" >.



5. EMBASSY HMMER application notes
5.1 hmmalign
hmmalign reads an HMM profile <hmmfile> and a set of sequences <seqfile>, 
aligns the sequences to the profile HMM, and outputs a multiple sequence 
alignment <outfile>. The set of sequences may be unaligned or aligned. If it 
is aligned, the existing alignment is ignored and hmmalign will align them 
the way it wants.

Usage:
ehmmalign [options] hmmfile seqfile outfile

The outfile parameter is new to EMBASSY HMMER. The multiple sequence alignment 
is always written to outfile. The name of outfile is specified by the -o 
option as normal.

The following original HMMER options are not supported:
-h         : Use -help to get help information instead.
-informat  : All common sequence file formats are supported automatically.
-oneline   : Alignment format output is specified via the ACD file and / or 
             the -aformat command line qualifier.
-outformat : Alignment format output is specified via the ACD file and / or 
             the -aformat command line qualifier.

Note: ehmmalign makes a temporary local copy of its input sequence data.  You 
must ensure there is sufficient disk space for this in the directory that 
ehmmalign is run.



5.2 hmmbuild
hmmbuild reads a multiple sequence alignment file <alignfile>, builds a new 
profile HMM, and saves the HMM to file <hmmfile>. By default, the model is 
confgured to find one or more nonoverlapping alignments to the complete model: 
multiple global alignments with respect to the model, and local with respect 
to the sequence. This is analogous to the behavior of the hmmls program of 
HMMER 1. To confgure the model for multiple local alignments with respect to 
the model and local with respect to the sequence, a la the old program hmmfs, 
use the -f (fragment) option. More rarely, you may want to confgure the model 
for a single global alignment (global with respect to both model and sequence), 
using the -g option; or to confgure the model for a single local/local 
alignment (a la standard Smith/Waterman, or the old hmmsw program), use the -s 
option.

Usage:
ehmmbuild [options] alignfile hmmfile 

Important note: the alignfile (input) and hmmfile (output) parameters are 
specified in the reverse order in the original HMMER. 

The following original HMMER options are not supported:
-h         : Use -help to get help information instead.
-f         : Use -strategy option instead.
-g         : Use -strategy option instead.
-s         : Use -strategy option instead.
-A         : Set append: "N" or append: "Y" for "hmmfile" in the ACD file instead.
-F         : Always set (an existing hmmfile will be overwritten).
-amino     : Sequence alignment type is specified via the ACD file.
-nucleic   : Sequence alignment type is specified via the ACD file.
-informat  : All common alignment formats are supported automatically.  
-wblosum   : Use -weighting option to specify the sequence weighting algorithm. 
-wgsc      : Use -weighting option to specify the sequence weighting algorithm. 
-wme       : Use -weighting option to specify the sequence weighting algorithm. 
-wnone     : Use -weighting option to specify the sequence weighting algorithm. 
-wpb       : Use -weighting option to specify the sequence weighting algorithm. 
-wvoronoi  : Use -weighting option to specify the sequence weighting algorithm. 
-verbose   : Use -verbosity instead.

The following additional options are provided:
-weighting : Sequence weighting algorithm. 

Note: the user must provide the full filename of an alignment for the 
"alignfile" ACD option, not an indirect reference to a set of sequences, e.g. 
a USA is NOT acceptable.  This is because hmmbuild (which ehmmbuild wraps) 
requires an alignment and does not support USAs.




5.3 hmmcalibrate
hmmcalibrate reads an HMM file from <hmmfilein>, scores a large number of 
synthesized random sequences with it, fts an extreme value distribution (EVD) 
to the histogram of those scores, and re-saves hmmfile now including the EVD 
parameters to file <hmmfileout>. hmmcalibrate may take several minutes (or 
longer) to run. While it is running, a temporary file called hmmfile.xxx is 
generated in your working directory. If you abort hmmcalibrate prematurely 
(ctrl-C, for instance), your original hmmfile will be untouched, and you 
should delete the hmmfile.xxx temporary file.

Usage:
ehmmcalibrate [options] hmmfilein hmmfileout

The hmmfileout parameter is new to EMBASSY HMMER.

The following original HMMER options are not supported:
-h         : Use -help to get help information instead.

The following additional options are provided:
-hmmfileout: Output file with HMM and EVD parameters.


5.4 ehmmconvert
hmmconvert reads an HMM file <oldhmmfile> in any HMMER format, and writes it 
to a new file <newhmmfile> in a new format. The input and output files must 
be different files; you can't reliably overwrite the old file. By default, the 
new HMM file is written in HMMER 2 ASCII format. Available formats are HMMER 2 
ASCII (default), HMMER 2 binary (-b) GCG profile (-p) , and Compugen XSW 
extended profile (-P).

Usage:
ehmmconvert [options] oldhmmfile newhmmfile

The following original HMMER options are not supported:
-h         : Use -help to get help information instead.
-a         : Use -format to set HMM output file format. 
-b         : Use -format to set HMM output file format. 
-p         : Use -format to set HMM output file format. 
-P         : Use -format to set HMM output file format. 
-A         : Set append: "N" or append: "Y" for "newhmmfile" in the ACD file 
             instead.  Note you cannot append to an empty file or one in GCG 
             or Compugen (xsw) formats. 
-F         : Always set (an existing newhmmfile will be overwritten).


5.5 ehmmemit
hmmemit reads an HMM file from a file <hmmfile> containing one or more HMMs, 
and generates a number of sequences from each HMM; or, if the -c option is 
selected, generate a single majority-rule consensus. This can be useful for 
various applications in which one needs a simulation of sequences consistent 
with a sequence family consensus. By default, hmmemit generates 10 sequences 
and outputs them in FASTA (unaligned) format file <outfile>.

Usage:
ehmmemit [options] hmmfile outfile

The outfile parameter is new to EMBASSY HMMER.  The synthetic sequences are 
always written to outfile. The name of outfile is specified by the -o option 
as normal.

The following original HMMER options are not supported:
-h         : Use -help to get help information instead.


5.6 ehmmfetch
hmmfetch is a small utility that retrieves an HMM called of a given name <name> 
from a HMMER model database <database>, in a new format, and prints that model 
to file <outfile>. For example, 'hmmfetch Pfam rrm my.file' retrieves the RRM 
(RNA recognition motif) model from Pfam, if the environment variable HMMERDB is 
set to the location of the Pfam database. The retrieved HMM file is written in 
HMMER 2 ASCII format. The database must have an associated GSI index file. To 
index an HMM database, use the program hmmindex.

Usage:
ehmmfetch [options] database name outfile

The outfile parameter is new to EMBASSY HMMER.

The following original HMMER options are not supported:
-h         : Use -help to get help information instead.

The following additional options are provided:
-outfile   : Output file with HMM.


5.7 ehmmindex
hmmindex is a utility that creates a binary SSI ('squid sequence index' format) 
index for an HMM database file called <database>. The new index file is named 
database.ssi. An SSI index file is required for hmmfetch to work, and also for 
the PVM implementation of hmmpfam.

Usage:
ehmmindex [options] database

The following original HMMER options are not supported:
-h         : Use -help to get help information instead.

The index file is hardcoded to database.ssi (where database is the name of the database that was indexed) and is written to the same directory as the input file.  This behaviour could be changed in the future.




5.8 ehmmpfam
hmmpfam reads a sequence file <seqfile> and compares each sequence in it, one 
at a time, against all the HMMs in a file <hmmfile> looking for signifcantly 
similar sequence matches.  hmmfile will be looked for first in the current 
working directory, then in a directory named by the environment variable 
HMMERDB. This lets administrators install HMM library(s) such as Pfam in a 
common location.  There is a separate output report (written to file <outfile>
for each sequence in seqfile. This report consists of three sections: a ranked 
list of the best scoring HMMs, a list of the best scoring domains in order of 
their occurrence in the sequence, and alignments for all the best scoring 
domains. A sequence score may be higher than a domain score for the same 
sequence if there is more than one domain in the sequence; the sequence score 
takes into account all the domains. All sequences scoring above the -E and -T 
cutoffs are shown in the first list, then every domain found in this list is 
shown in the second list of domain hits. If desired, E-value and bit score 
thresholds may also be applied to the domain list using the -domE and -domT 
options.

Usage:
ehmmpfam [options] hmmfile seqfile outfile

The outfile parameter is new to EMBASSY HMMER.

The following original HMMER options are not supported:
-h         : Use -help to get help information instead.
-informat  : All common sequence file formats are supported automatically.

The following additional options are provided:
-outfile   : Output file with HMM.

Note: ehmmpfam makes a temporary local copy of its input sequence data.  You 
must ensure there is sufficient disk space for this in the directory that 
ehmmpfam is run.


5.9 hmmsearch
hmmsearch reads an HMM from <hmmfile> and searches <seqfile> for signifcantly 
similar sequence matches.  seqfile will be looked for first in the current 
working directory, then in a directory named by the environment variable 
BLASTDB. This lets users use existing BLAST databases, if BLAST has been 
confgured for the site. hmmsearch may take minutes or even hours to run, 
depending on the size of the sequence database. The output is written to a 
file called <outfile>.  The output consists of four sections: a ranked list 
of the best scoring sequences, a ranked list of the best scoring domains, 
alignments for all the best scoring domains, and a histogram of the scores. A 
sequencescore may be higher than a domain score for the same sequence if there 
is more than one domain in the sequence; the sequence score takes into account 
all the domains. All sequences scoring above the -E and -T cutoffs are shown 
in the frst list, then every domain found in this list is shown in the second 
list of domain hits. If desired, E-value and bit score thresholds may also be 
applied to the domain list using the -domE and -domT options.

Usage:
hmmsearch [options] hmmfile seqfile outfile

The outfile parameter is new to EMBASSY HMMER.

The following original HMMER options are not supported:
-h         : Use -help to get help information instead.
-informat  : All common sequence file formats are supported automatically.

The following additional options are provided:
-outfile   : Multiple sequence alignment output file.

Note: the user must provide the full filename of a sequence database for 
the sequence input ("seqfile" ACD option), not an indirect reference, e.g. 
a USA is NOT acceptable.  This is because hmmsearch (which ehmmsearch wraps) 
does not support USAs, and a full sequence database is too big to write to 
a temporary file that the original hmmsearch would understand.



6. Rough guide to writing an EMBASSY wrapper to HMMER.
6.1  Download HMMER source code & User's Guide from http://hmmer.wustl.edu/
6.2  Read Chapters 1 (Introduction) and 2 (Installation) and do the tutorial 
     (Chapter 3) if you're not already familiar with HMMER.
6.3  Work through the manual pages (Chapter 7) for each application in turn 
     (see 6.4 and 6.5 below).
6.4  Decide which application options will be kept in the EMBOSS version.  
     Options might not be supported because:
     (i)  The option is redundant because of in-built EMBOSS functionality, e.g. 
          the HMMER help option -h is not needed because -help is an in-built 
          qualifier for all EMBOSS applications. 
     (ii) The option is subsumed by an EMBOSS qualifier, e.g. -wblosum, -wgsc, 
          -wme, -wnone, -wpb and -wvoronoi options of hmmbuild are all handled 
          by the a single -weighting option in ehmmbuild (EMBASSY application).  
     (iii)The option is always set so need not be defined in the ACD file, e.g.
          -F option of various applications for force overwrite of files.
6.5  Decide whether a new parameter (typically for the application output, 
     which might be written to stdout by default) is required.
6.6. Implement the ACD file: 
     (i)  Use the same application names but precede the EMBOSS versions with 
          an 'e'.  
     (ii) Paste application short description from the User Guide into the 
          documentation: "" attribute of the application definition.  
     (iii)Paste documentation for each option from the User Guide into the 
          help: "" and information: "" attributes.  (iv) Preserve the option / 
          qualifier names where possible, even for single characters (on the 
          arguable grounds that consistency to the original hmmer is more 
          important than consistency with EMBOSS).  
6.7. Implement the C source code: 
     (i)  Add the header documentation.  
     (ii) Add an empty main() function.  
     (iii)Add call to ajNamInit & ajAcdInitP.  
     (iv) Add variables to handle ACD data items.  
     (v)  Add calls to ajAcdGetXXX to retrieve ACD values.  
     (vi) Add code to clean-up the ACD variables.  
     (vii)Add code to construct and call the HMMER command line.  Take care!  
          There are several subtle implementation issues you should be aware of 
          that are documented in the source code itself.
6.8. Modify or write the README file.  This should describe how to download the 
     original and EMBASSY versions of HMMER, where to get installation 
     instructions and documentation, requirements, caveats etc.  In particular 
     it should describe for each application which HMMER options are supported 
     as ACD qualifiers, any new qualifiers and parameters and if the order of 
     parameters has changed  See embassy/hmmernew/README.
6.9. Prepare the QA tests, based on the examples in the tutorial which use files 
     from the HMMER distribution.
6.10. Generate the HTML documentation.

